### [Review: Cosmic reionisation](https://www.tandfonline.com/eprint/ZZJXYQFJZDXZCDVNIN2K/full?target=10.1080%2F00107514.2019.1631548&)

1. Background astrophysics
   - The universe undergoes several phase transition. Some are the split of forces. Reionisation is also a phase transition.
   - Given a spherical DM halo collapsing in an expanding Universe, the mean density is$$\rho_h = 18\pi^2\rho_c (1+z)^3$$, where $$\rho_c$$ is the critical density at the collapse time. Given the halo mass $$M_h$$ and mean density $$\rho_h$$, we could compute halo radius $$r_c$$ (assuming a flat density profile), circular velocity $$V_c$$ at halo radius, and viral temperature (defined as $$k_b T_{vir} = mV_c^2$$).
   - Reionisation and recombination could achieve an equilibrium. By equating reionisation rate and recombination rate, one can calculate a ionization fraction $$\chi_e = n_e / n_{H}$$. Reionisation rate depends on electron density times proton density, temperature and also which state $$n$$ it goes to. We don't consider photon recombines to $$n=1$$ since the photon it emits can ionize another atom.  **H II ** region is generally highly ionized, with ionization fraction ~1 and neutral H fraction $$10^{-4}$$. 
   - Present day IGM is about $$10^5$$ K, and is fully ionized, including H and He (hot ionized gas). But how?
2. Ending the cold dark ages
   - Different DM halos could host different kind of celestial bodies. With the merger of DM halos, more and more massive galaxies begin to form. Cold gas falls into the potential well of DM halo, fuel the star formation. Cold gas becomes warmer when falling inside, then the shocked gas undergoes cooling. Two key processes: efficiency of radiative cooling, and ability of the halo to retain heated gas (by radiation and SNe). They are related to halo mass. Star formation relies on cooling efficiency. 
   - The relative velocity between DM halo and gas is supersonic!! This is because that DM is collision-less but photos/electrons don't. This velocity is called streaming velocity, which decays as $$a^{-1}$$.  For a scenario without streaming velocity, the Jean mass is 32000 solar mass at z=30, decreases as $$a^{-1.5}$$. 
   - Population 1, 2, 3. Since population 3 protostar is lacking of metals, the cooling ability is low, making these stars more massive (tens of solar mass) than population 1 or 2. So how does metal-free ionized hydrogen get cooled? Through H2 formation with free electron as a catalyst. However this process is fragile. Considering the Lyman-Werner lines and also streaming velocity, the lowest halo mass to hold the first star is around $$10^6$$ solar mass. Although the forming rate of first stars is low, they could emit tremendous ionizing photons and cause the reionisation since they are all very massive. There is only ONE generation of Population 3 stars.
   - The death of Pop 3 star gave birth to black hole core. BH grows by accretion. Accretion disk forms because of the conservation of angular momentum. The temperature in the disk could reach $$10^4$$ to $$10^7$$ K, emitting strong X-ray. The UV luminosity of BH is not as strong as massive stars, but X-ray penetrates farther and ionize IGM to 100 kpc.
3. Observational constrains
   - QSO. Gunn-Peterson trough indicates an elevated neutral hydrogen fraction. By observing high-z QSO with Gunn-Peterson trough, we can determine when the trough disappeared, then further determine the ending of reionisation. Btw, a tiny amount of neutral hydrogen will be optically thick enough and absorb all light at $$1216(1+z)$$ angstrom. Anyway, QSO spectra probe the end of cosmic reionisation.
   - CMB. CMB photons can be scattered by free electrons (Thomson scattering). By measuring the total amount of CMB photons and calculating the total amount of CMB photos theoretically, an optical depth could be calculated. Then the time of reionisation can be worked out by assuming some reionisation models. Planck data indicates $$z=7.82\pm0.71$$ when the universe is half-ionized.
   - 21-cm lines. We can define a spin temperature $$T_s = T_* \ln(3n_0 / n_1) $$, where $$T_* = E_{21}/k_B$$. This temperature depicts the distribution of states on hyperfine levels. Before everything got ionized, the spin temperature is tightly bonded with CMB temperature. Absorption and emission will change the spin temperature slightly for $$\delta T_b$$. Stars began to form after $$z\sim30$$, decrease $$\delta T_b$$. X-ray sources will increase $$\delta T_b$$. Overall, $$\delta T_b$$ would decrease to negative and smoothly converge to zero. We have observed a trough from EDGES centering at $$z\sim 18$$, indicating many interesting new physics. 

